Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by our return guest, Doctor Julia Haman. She
is an assistant Professor of Philosophy and Ethics at
the University of Trent. And today we're talking about
the ethics of Actos technologies and techno moral revolution.
So, Doctor Eman, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone again.
Thank you very much. It's a pleasure for me
to be here.
So I I mean, we've already covered a bit
of these in our first interview with doctors IBO
van de Van de Pool and yo and Hob
and Doctor Hob is going to kill me because
I keep mispronouncing his first name. But anyway, um
what is Actos technology?
Yeah, that technology is better known as artificial womb
technology. It's a reproductive technologies that enables the gestation
of a fetus outside of its mother's body in
a device that mimics the maternal womb. The term
exogenesis means mammalian development outside the maternal body where
this normally happens within so, not necessarily human development,
but the development of a mammal more generally and
so those devices, those extra two set of devices
really try to be completely like the natural womb.
So they include components such as an artificial placenta,
artificial amniotic fluid. Yeah. And currently such a technology
is being developed in the Netherlands, for instance, at
Eindhoven University, but also in the United States, of
course, and by a team from Japan and Australia.
And uh there's an interesting distinction here between the
partial Acto gestation and full Acto gestation. Could you
tell us about the difference?
Yeah, it's very important actually to distinguish the two.
So the term partial active gestation refers to the
use of this technology only for part of this
gestation process. So for instance, when a fetus is
born prematurely, full ecto gestation by contrast refers to
a more futuristic scenario where this technology is used
for the whole process of extra uterine gestation. So
from fertilization to birth and the scientists who are
currently developing this technology, they intended to be used
only for partial electro gestation. So the idea is
that this would solve the big problem of premature
death. So it would replace current incubators, the incubators
that are in use in neonatal intensive care units.
So partial electro gestation seems to be much closer
to the current situation. Whereas full electro gestation for
some seems completely like science fiction. Um SOME say
we shouldn't even think about it. It's far too
futuristic. Others view it as the liberation of women,
like especially people who see pregnancy as a burden
something we should get rid of, it's much more
contested. And it's important that the developers of this
technology at least say that they are not interested
at all in such a scenario.
So uh but from an ethical perspective, because that's
what we're going to focus on mostly here today,
why does this distinction matter between these two different
kinds of ecto gist technologies? Even though at least
one of them is more, let's say conceptual, more
fut futuristic. So,
yeah, so one argument from an ethical perspective is
that we need to first look at the specific
case of partial activation because that is something that
might already become real in the very near future,
let's say probably in a few years, we already
have the first inhuman trials. And it already already
this scenario raises significant ethical issues specifically about the
rights that the mother would still have over the
yeah, features that would then be in this device
about the rights of doctors. Um Would that human
being in this device be treated as a patient
in its own right? Or would it more be
seen as part of the mother still, although it's
not in her body anymore, and it has all
kinds of legal implications and because it is sometimes
presented as just something like a more high tech,
more advanced incubator that might lead people to think,
well, then there is not much ethical like not
many ethical issues um that we need to consider
but that is not the case. So it's very
important to point that out that already this use
um has these important implications. And then comparatively, if
you look at full electric gestation, that of course
raises entirely new issues because the whole idea that
we might, that women might not need to get
pregnant anymore for like offspring to be created that
makes you Yeah. Yeah. Comes with a whole sub
issues that I I'm happy to talk also more
about later. So I think there are some questions
that you can say apply to both use of
the technology. But um it's important to distinguish between
that which might become real or might be in
use already. Yeah, in the near future. And those
new questions actually that arise when we contemplate this
more futuristic scenario
and what kinds of sative technologies if any do
we already have available?
Well, that is the so called bio that has
been used by the researchers at Philadelphia's Children's Hospital
in the US when 2017 managed to transfer lamb
fetuses in such a bio and then took them
out of the bag health. And that was seen
as a great success towards such a device for
humans so that we already have, but we don't
yet have any such technology available for humans. We
first we are still expecting the first in human
trials and perhaps also one other thing to note
that next to this artificial womb is I now
want to call it just to make clear that
the idea is to mimic the natural womb. There's
also a technology just called the artificial placenta, that's
for instance, currently developed at my home university in
20 that is in some respects similar and also
aims at solving this problem of preterm death. So
also intended to, to sort of replace incubators, but
it doesn't aim at completely mimicking the womb. Um
So it doesn't create this womb like environment, but
you could perhaps say it, it is something similar,
it gets much less media attention than the the
other form of this technology.
Uh So you mentioned a premature premature death there.
Um WHAT would be the goals, the medical goals
of these technologies? I mean, in what kinds of
situations would people want or would expect to use
them?
Yeah, in cases where fetuses are prematurely born and
especially they are looking at the period between 22
and 24 weeks of gestation. Um The idea would
be that those prematurely born born babies would have
much higher chances to survive in such an artificial
womb compared to an incubator. And that is mainly
because the lungs and then not sufficiently developed yet.
And in an incubator, the baby has to breathe,
which is actually cannot yet. And in the artificial
womb, it wouldn't have to do that. It would
be in an environment very similar to the maternal
womb. And so the chances of survival are expected
to be much higher and also to um the
chance of survival without severe handicaps. So the if
asked also scientists about this and they said that
they feel with the current technology, the incubators, they
have reached a certain limit, they are unable to,
to solve this problem to reduce like the death
even more. And they really need a fundamentally new
technology to make progress here.
So last time in our first interview, as I
said before, we talked about uh the ethics of
socially disrupt disruptive technologies. And that also included a
discussion about how uh cons concepts that we have
can be disrupted in a way. So in this
particular case of sative technologies, what would you say
are perhaps some of the main concepts, main ideas
that we share as a society that could potentially
be disrupted.
Yeah, concepts such as pregnancy, birth, also body, then
concepts of fetus in neonates and the whole cluster
of concepts uh involving including mother, father, parent, family
and so on. So perhaps if I can start
with birth, interesting concept in this context. So if
we look at parry electro gestation, we don't really
need to go so far and look at full
electric gestation, then the question would arise when the
moment is when a baby is being born because
usually we conceive of birth as involving two kinds
of changes, a physiological change and a change in
location. And this technology would that separate the two.
So in in this case, you would say that
the fetus that has been transferred into this device
has gone through like location change, but there has
been no significant physiological change. It would still not
have to breathe, it would still continue developing in
the same way as it did in the maternal
womb. So then you could ask, well, has it
been born or not? And you would wonder perhaps
there would be two moments of birth. So it
will be completely unclear to what? Yeah, um event
the concept of birth would apply. And perhaps you,
you would even have to conclude that you need
a different concept because that's not really birth, neither
of that, right? Neither the transfer into the artificial
womb nor than the extraction out of this device
or something
on the topic, on the topic of birth. Uh
GOING back to the distinction between partial and full
ecto gestation because in the case of partial ecto
gestation at a certain point, uh the fetus goes
out of the womb into the machine or whatever
it might be for, for it to undergo the
rest of what would have been interest uterine development,
right? But, but if we add somewhere in the
future, full actual gestation, then there would be at
least the potential there for even the conception and
the rest of the development to occur fully within
a machine, right? And, and not at any point
within a woman's body, right? So in that specific
case, birth would be completely disrupted, right? II I
Yes, because of course, there would be this moment
where this entity, however, you would then want to
call, it would undergo a location change because it
would somehow come out of this machine. But yeah,
would you really call that birth? Right? You also
talk about giving birth. Would the machine give birth?
It would probably
that would sound very weird.
Very weird. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
So uh and perhaps tell us about other concepts
like body fetus.
Yeah. So with body, the interesting thing is that
the boundary between body and machine seems to be
very blurred, right? Because according to one model of
um pregnancy, the parts are called part hood model.
The fetus is seen as part of its mother's
body. So when we take this model and then
we think of the fetus being transferred into this
machine and developing and growing further inside the machine,
you might want to consider it as now becoming
part of this machine. So that's really interesting. And
you and then you can also ask, well, um
what actually then happens to the relation between the
fetus and the mother? So perhaps there's also then
a very intimate relationship between the mother and this
machine because this fetus was a part of her
and that then has been transferred. So that's, that's
really interesting. It seems there's no clear distinction between
um the body of either the fetus or the
mother and this machine. And then that's also interesting
to consider the concepts fetus in the unit because
there's a debate in the literature, especially in the
medical bioethics literature about how we should call the
being that has been transferred into this device. So
there are people who argue it, it should just
be called a fetus because it's very similar to
a fetus. It's actually a fetus and others say,
no, it's not a fetus is it's a neon
or newborn and it should be called. Thus, it's
more similar to a neon. And it has been
argued by Elizabeth Roman is that both concepts or
both terms do not really fit because they have
specific connotations that are not adequate when we think
of this new situation. So we need a new
concept, a new term. They talk about terms, but
they think that there are conceptual implications here. So
Oman is herself has suggested the term gest link,
very technical sounding term. Others have come up with
uh the concept font that clearly combines F as
a neon at the fonet. There's also the concept
Perin. So that is a very interesting discussion and
it shows that the disruption is taking place here
and we do not know anymore what concept to
apply.
So uh I had these questions for later, but
perhaps since we're already talking about disrupting a concept
like body, let's introduce the topic here of abortion.
Uh I want to introduce it now because um
I mean, o of course, we have this idea
or at least the people who defend the right
for women to abort or the right for abortion.
Uh Many times argue on the grounds that at
least while the fetus is inside her body, it
is her body. We're still talking about her body.
It's a part of her body. So it's for
her to decide what occurs in her body, right?
So, but in this particular case, since uh at
least at a certain point in partial ectal gestation
and in full ectal gestation, it's fully outside of
the body or it would be fully outside of
the body. The fetus is no longer part of
uh the mother's body. Do you think that the
ways we think about abortion uh would also have
to change?
I do think so. And this is already also
being anticipated. So there is also a discussion in
the philosophical literature about this and some really fear
that this technology could have a negative effect on
the right to abortion because indeed, it could for
instance, be argued that if there's the possibility to
transfer a fetus to an artificial womb, then um
yeah, there would be no grounds. We would lose
the grounds for arguing that there is a right
to abortion, right? So then you might be, you
might even force pregnant women to opt for ation
instead of abortion for instance, if you think of
fall to gestation and then wonder, well, what would
abortion mean? In this case they get that is,
I think even more disruptive to even understand what
abortion would amount to so terminating. Yeah, would be
turning off the machine. Exactly. It would there be,
how would you, so you really would have to
think about new or new legal regulations. Um, SO
how people do the first, um, aspect that I
mentioned, what, what people have argued is for instance,
that the grounds for defending still like the right
or the permissibility of abortion would be to say
that. And some really argue that that there is
a right to the death of the fetus. So
it's let's go so far. So there is a
right to the death of the fetus and then
you could that way justify abortion. And another way
of arguing is to say that like doing this
transferal of the fetus is very invasive and that
women should have the right to s to reject
that invasive, like a a and, and, and instead
opt for an abortion. And it's certainly very interesting
topic and there is already quite some discussion in
the literature about what this would mean. And, and,
and some people really were very worried that this
might have a negative effect on abortion.
Yeah. A a and another thing that was coming
to my mind is of course, if uh a
child is born I mean, we have to take
care of it in some way. So in this
particular case, if uh the state forced women went
to abort to sort of transfer their fetus into
a machine for partial gestation, I mean, who would
be uh legally responsible for raising the uh the
child? I mean, would we force the original mother,
the original gest, let's say to uh provide for
that child that she didn't want. I mean, th
this raises lots of questions, complicated questions.
Right. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I think no
way of seeing this would be that the idea
would be then to you look for like adoptive
parents for that child. So the idea would be
then to do a but what if they don't
find anyone? So that definitely, yeah, perhaps it would
just be seen as a child that has lost
the parents through. Yeah, an incident, accident or something.
And then you need to see the, I guess
the state would be, it will probably be that
the state is responsible and then the aim would
be to find people who adopt that. But then
of course you need also enough people who, who
want to adopt a child. Um, YEAH, it's hard
to do think of this really because we don't
know how many cases there would be. Yeah, it
gets very speculative but definitely a lot of questions
that we would have to answer. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And perhaps I mean, perhaps we are still
thinking a little bit here from our own cultural
perspective because we still live in a society where
this kind of technology is not available and these
kinds of concepts have not been disrupted yet. So
we still tend to think about fathers, mothers, about
neonates, fetuses and all of that, about bodies. Uh
But um I, I mean, I, I was just
thinking that uh I mean, along the same lines
of what I was saying just in my previous
question that uh II I mean, this could be
sort of, this could create some nightmarish scenarios because
if, for example, a government uh just takes away
the right to abortion and forces women, even women
who don't want to have Children just because they
get accidentally pregnant or something like that to then
move their f to a machine and do partial
act of gestation. I mean, they could either force
the women to be responsible for that child, she
doesn't want to or didn't want to have. Uh
OR I mean, uh we could go down the
route that you described there or, or perhaps looking
for adoptive parents or something like that. But at
least in the very early stages, Children would still
live in a culture where they think about mothers
and fathers and in that particular case, since the
child exists and was not aborted, I mean, there
would be a mother, biological mother out there that
basically didn't want the child and the child if
she knows or he or she knows, gets to
learn about that. I mean, since we live in
this particular cultural context, it could be traumatic.
Right. Absolutely. Yeah. But of course, we could also
imagine that the whole all practices have already been
disrupted fundamentally. And we do not think in terms
of mothers and fathers anymore, but perhaps even more
parents generally and that perhaps groups of people who
would act as parents. And yeah, perhaps also the
way of becoming parents would, would have changed. So
then you would also not look for these adoptive
like a mother and a father anymore, but you
would look for a community for instance, perhaps that
would raise this child.
Yeah. Yeah. No, no, definitely. That's why I, I
prefaced my uh my previous question by saying that
we have to keep in mind that we are
still thinking in these terms and it's very hard
for us to put ourselves in the world or
to imagine. And also I was in a world
where we were Children, perhaps wouldn't care that much
about who, who is their father, their mother or
something like that.
And we already have, of course, in our world
cultures where always many more people are closely involved
in, in the upbringing and where, yeah, much less
weight is given to one particular person as a
mother and where even several women, but mostly women.
Yeah, if not only women are seen as their
mothers or as mother being a child.
Yeah. I, I mean, I've talked with lots of
anthropologists on the show about cooper breathing. So that's
a very, very, very common thing mostly nowadays in
traditional societies. But for most of our history and
our revolution it was very common.
Yeah, exactly. I mean, now I saw in the
western world are so used to this idea that
the mother and the father and this is not
even something indeed that has such a long history,
but this is yeah, very dominant at the moment.
And, and that's also how we first of all
look at this technology and possible future scenarios. That's
true.
Yeah, it's just our obsession with the nuclear family,
right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So uh tell us now about how perhaps gender
roles could also be disrupted because it's not only
that we think about fathers and mothers, but we
also associate fatherhood and motherhood with being a man
or being a woman, right? So could that also
be disrupted the way we think about genders and
gender roles?
Yeah, I do think so because there are these
different dimensions of parenthood or motherhood in particular, namely
the genetic dimension or biological dimensions, we can talk
about genetic motherhood than gestational motherhood. That of course,
doesn't exist for parents generally that's really tied to
the gender to the females. This gestational motherhood and
then social motherhood or parenthood that's independent of independent
of gender, but of course, the social expectations or
the expectations of social parenthood, they are very different
between the different genders. So this technology especially Full
Act legislation that would enable the um yeah, development
or creation of offspring without there being any gestational
mother at all that I think would really disrupt
the concept of a woman or a man. And,
and, and yeah, the gender current gender roles. And
um yeah, I mean, we see that's very often,
I think um the notion of woman is so
closely tied to her ability to become pregnant and
to have Children. And there are many societies, communities
where this is also expected of women and where
you, you sort of fail as a woman if
you do not have or do not have Children.
So it can be very problematic, very also psychologically
disturbing for a woman if she cannot have Children
and like in a natural way. So if it
is, of course, all is ultimately tied to the
fact that as things currently are. Mhm You need
to feed my body to, to have a child
for a child to be born, if this were
to change, if this were not necessary anymore. I
think it is hard to think from all the
implications but that I think it's such a central
point.
Mhm
So I definitely think that gender roles.
Yeah. And do you think that perhaps, do you
think that perhaps the disruption here could even take
a step further. Uh I mean, beyond uh disrupting
generals and perhaps even disrupting our understanding of sex
itself. And I mean, by sex, I mean, a
male, female, our understanding of what you, what it
is to be a male, what it is to
be a female. Because I mean, even in that
visionary biology, our understanding of what sex is keeps
changing a little bit as we make new discoveries.
But in this particular case, if we have machines
that would potentially be able to create new Children
without handing it for uh a uterus or something
like that, then could that also be disrupted?
I would say yes, but of course, that is
quite an extreme scenario. You would really have to
assume perhaps even have to assume that all a
reproduction would happen through this technology at some point.
So then you could even completely forget about the
past where actually like mothers became pregnant and had
Children. But if this was in a way forgotten
because you have these machines and you have like
IVF and then the stage in these machines, then
yeah, you might not at all conceptualize female and
male according to those differences. So these perhaps that,
I mean, of course, I imagine if, if then
also those biological functions wouldn't really be used anymore.
So that then perhaps they would also in part
of evolution just disappear, right? So perhaps even women
would lose the ability or capacity to, to, to
have Children to become pregnant.
Oh my God. Another sort of dystopic scenario just
came to my mind where we would get into
a future where we have full sative technology. And
then we also have ways of artificially producing mass
producing sperm and eggs. And then it would be,
and then a dictatorship, the state would just keep
producing its own Children without any need for people
to reproduce. And, oh, now I need more soldiers
for war. Let's pump out 10,000 new kids.
And you find things like that in the science
fiction literature. So this is something that indeed people
have thought of. Really. It is, yeah, very dystopian
scenario. And also I think, I mean, there are
a lot of objections to this technology, right? And
one is a colleague of mine has made that
objection that it seems to be absurd to develop
and implement a technology to take over a function
that women can just um yeah, do by themselves,
right? I mean, imagine how much energy those devices
would use, think, think about our climate crisis in
that light. So how can you justify doing this?
I mean, it it it seems crazy when you
think about, yeah, the fact that this is something,
although of course there are problems, pregnancies can be
very dangerous, they can be very burdensome. The fact
that women are pregnant and, and give birth to
Children and not men has created huge social and
economic inequality. So all of that definitely could provide
reasons to think that such a technology would be
desirable. But on the other hand, of course, there
are also pregnancy and giving birth has also many
positive connotations and and and many women have enjoyed
like being pregnant and and and having their Children
this way. And yeah, and you can say that
it it it enables a particular way of bonding
between mother and child. And there are also all
these question marks related to what effect would that
have on the development of the baby? Also on
the like mental health, perhaps general development. It it's
it's many, many question marks whether this would actually
be to the benefit of the child. You might
say, well, it would be a very safe environment
safer than the natural womb because you could monitor
everything, couldn't happen that for instance, the mother eats
unhealthy food or drinks, alcohol consumes drugs, which has
a ne like certainly we know that the negative
health effect on the baby. And so you could
control all that. Um But nevertheless, what I mean,
you also, people also believe that it is very,
has a very positive effect on the fetus that
it has this very intimate relationship to its mother
already while it is in the womb, that feeling
her heartbeat or hearing her h hearing her voice,
also hearing the father's voice through the belly, etcetera,
etcetera. So many uh yeah, question marks and, and,
and worries that you can have.
So let me ask you uh a more perhaps
positive question. Now, so when it, we've already talked
about how gender roles and the concepts of father,
mother, parent might be disrupted by these kinds of
technologies. So, on a more positive note, do you
think that it could be um positive for trans
women? Because we uh we tend to, as we've
already talked about here, we tend to associate the
idea of mother to s uh to people who
can produce babies who can get pregnant and give
birth to them. So in this particular case, if
we arrived at a point where uh we would
not no longer necessarily need that for babies to
be, to develop. Um Do you, do you think
that perhaps that would uh increase social acceptance at
least uh not, not necessarily for trans people themselves,
but for the idea of attaching a label like
mother to a trans woman?
Yes, I do do think so. I do think
that that would be a way it develops, could
be that we would be more open to apply
the concept of mother to, for instance, um childs
uh women, it could also go like a slightly
different direction, namely that we would get rid of
the concept mother altogether and would just talk about
parents. Because if you think about scenarios of electric
station, you start wondering what actually is the crucial
difference here between a mother and a father. It,
it is far from clear. So um you could
argue that if gestational motherhood is taken over by
a machine, which was the thing that the aspect
that man could not like, it didn't apply to
men would say what would be the difference. I
mean, we would, we could just talk about parents
because they can be social parents, they can be
genetic parents. Nobody has to be the gestational parent.
That would be the machine. So in that sense,
and then of course, you anyway, could be much
more open to apply that label parent to all
kinds of people. So it why would that have
to be related to gender or sex? Right? Um
It seems it wouldn't have to be so that
I think are two ways you could say that
because you might argue that the concept mother is
so deeply ingrained in our culture. And it's just
because I mean, there are so many connotations that
you have with, with the term mother. So you
might really think that this is not something that
we would give up that is really important. And
then you might say, OK, but that would perhaps
be that there's openness to apply it to, to
not just women. Um The alternative would be why,
why do we need this concept anymore? In the
end, there is no significant distinction between mother and
father. So why not just talk about parent And
interestingly, Sally Haslinger has also thought about this but
not related to this technology. But she has also
in a way suggested talking about parents instead of
making this distinction between mothers and fathers.
Yeah, I was just thinking because of course, culture
tends to change um slowly, I mean, it's not
that uh today we have act or just technology
and then suddenly tomorrow, everyone no longer cares about
concepts like mother and father or, or things like
that. So I was just thinking that in the
case of trans women, since they uh identify as
women and like to present themselves socially as women
that perhaps uh at least while we're still using
concepts like mother and father, it would uh potentially
become more socially acceptable for uh them to also
use or, or identify themselves as mothers if they
are raising Children or so because they might like
to do that themselves since that there's that concept
in our culture and to perhaps express, I don't
know their femininity or something like that,
they probably also would really want to be called
mothers, right? Or to, to, to count as mothers
and rather than just parent because this is something
that they, yeah, I agree with that. And I
mean, we can of course, already see especially the
philosophical like discussion, ethical discussion that become very careful
when using the term woman. And so already there
is an openness to, to refer to people as
women who are not women in the sense of
being born with the female. And yeah, sex. So
I think that is definitely something that we can
imagine. And I mean, of course, that's something I
want to note also is that it's not that
we can consider this technology in isolation. Of course,
it is embedded in a history of reproductive technologies
and some of these disruptions and changes have already,
I mean, they are already ongoing. So it's not
that it's only this technology that brings about all
those, but it's it's others have also already done
their part and we have to see it in
that context. And then the question is how perhaps
this technology um leads to more radical and faster
changes and yeah, accelerates developments perhaps that are already
going on because of course, gender roles, traditional gender
roles have already been disrupted and are changing. And
nevertheless, we notice how much certain pictures stick, right?
Especially I think in the western world, as you
said, this idea of the nuclear family and of
the mother is the main like a caregiver of
a child, the most important person in the life
of a child. I think this is still very
dominant in our culture, right? Despite all these changes
that have already happened.
And it's very interesting that you mentioned that this
is or would be part of a history of
um reproductive uh technologies that disrupt certain aspects of
how we think and conceive of reproduction because we're
also going to get into uh some of that
here. But before that, could you tell us also
about this concept that you wrote about in your
work of techno moral revolutions? What is uh uh
uh I mean, if even before the techno techno
moral part of it, what is a moral revolution
more generally?
Yes, a moral revolution is a particular type of
moral change and it's typically taken to occur in
a rather short period of time and to involve
a moral paradigm change. So the authors who've mainly
written in philosophy about moral revolutions, they are typically
inspired by the work of Thomas Cohn on the
structure of scientific revolutions. And I think that in
the moral realm, something analogous happens or has happened.
Um IMPORTANT to say that more revolutions do not
necessarily have to be instances of moral progress. There's
also the whole literature of moral progress. Um And
a paradigm example is always the abolition of slavery.
And um the more revolution often you find actually
the same examples. But um in principle, that's something
that my co authors and I have also stressed,
it could also be a revolution that we would
regard as something negative or regressive from a moral
point of view. So it doesn't have to be
progressive, but it's so it's a radical change that
usually happens. It's most people think that in a
short period of time and you could perhaps talk
about like a moral paradigm shift.
So when we have the suffix or the pre
the prefix techno to moral revolution, uh what does
that mean specifically? And could you give us perhaps
an example of that?
Yeah. So the idea is that those techno more
revolutions consist of radical group or society level change,
not individual but society in morally significant practices whereby
technology plays a noteworthy role. So basically the idea
to call some yeah, development techno more revolution, not
just more revolutions is to point to the significant
role played by technology because that seems to have
been overlooked by most people who wrote about moral
evolutions. So an example is um the revolution in
sexual morality where contraceptive technology and in particular, the
pill arguably has played a very important role. So
the claim is not that um a technology alone
brings about a revolution but that it's a complex
process where different developments, different agents movements play a
role. But also there is a very interesting important
role played by technology. And in the, in the
case of the um sexual revolution or revolution in
sexual morality, we can say that contraceptives played an
enabling role.
Mhm A and here uh perhaps you are focusing
mostly on uh the pill is that
it? Yes, that is the focus also in the
literature on techno moral change. Um That is an
example that is very often given and they always
focus on the pill from what I've read about
the sexual revolution. Um Actually, it is contraceptive technology
more generally. It is not really plausible to think
it's only the pill. But yeah, the pill is
the one that is always singled out. And perhaps
because of its particular reliability, it is sort of
different. It's, yeah, it is a different kind of
contraception, but it is already earlier, you can see
significant changes once contraceptive technologies became available.
And when you mentioned changes in sexual morality, what
are or what were those changes specifically? Because uh
I know that, I mean, nowadays, we hear a
lot sometimes particularly more conservative people or people who
are more on the conservative end of the spectrum
talking about how some of these technologies in their
minds were just complete disaster because apparently, apparently people
became much more promiscuous and people do not care
about marriage anymore. So are those the sorts of
things we're talking about here or?
Yeah. No, I mean, the idea is more that
we moved away from a relatively strict system of
sexual morality where so sex outside of marriage was
seen as impermissible. Um The permissibility of sex and
gender was closely tied to reproduction, which is what
this technology really changed, right? Because it decoupled reproduction
from sex. So also homosexuality is what really regarded
as something negative. And also because the idea was
sex always has to lead to, to offspring. That
is what its purpose is and that couldn't of
course, be the purpose of homosexual sexual activities. So
through this decoupling of sex and reproduction, the grounds,
the reasons for arguing that homosexuality is like morally
bad and it should not be permitted. They were
just like they were not existed anymore and especially
also the expectations and the norms applying to women
changed and, and, and some virtues that used to
be very important like chastity, purity, sexual modesty, mainly
related to women. They just lost important with K
but of course, there are still groups but especially
also certain religions who uphold those values. It's not
that they have appeared disappeared entirely. But in many
contexts, in many societies, they now play rather a
marginal role. So an idea of, of technical changes
also that the relative importance of values and virtues
that changes through the influence of technology. So it's
not that something disappears entirely, but some virtues or
values become much more important, others less important. And
we see this phenomenon of demoralization. So homosexual sexuality
was highly moralized was seen as something morally bad,
but it came more and more to be seen
as actually something morally neutral. I mean, it's not
more really irrelevant whether someone is heterosexual or homosexual
or bisexual or whatever.
Uh I mean, not only it wasn't just moralized,
but it was also at a certain point even
medicalized, right? Because at a certain point, it was
in psychiatry, at least homosexuality and other kinds of
uh non heterosexual behaviors or tendencies were uh pathologize.
Yes, absolutely. And of course, this didn't change entirely
only through this technology to contraceptive technology. But that
really, you might say played a role here. And
then of course, you have to also give credit
to the social movements, um, that there's a lot
of work here. But this technology certainly without that,
you might wonder how perhaps it had been a
much slower process. You could imagine that and, and
yeah, perhaps that never happened in this way.
Uh But this is also very interesting to me
in another very particular kind of way that is,
doesn't this point also to the idea that I
mean, if we think we could think about it
in terms of i in realistic terms, I mean,
in sort of Marxist terms where I mean, ideas
that are prevalent in a society, hegemonic ideas do
not come from nowhere or it's not about the
just the ideas themselves, but it's, it's the sort
of uh the way our society is structured, our
sociality, ecological conditions, also technological revolutions that really lead
to people, people actually changing the ways they relate
to one another and the ideas that are prevalent
in their own societies, right? So, I mean, it
very much gives sort of a materialistic basis to
uh where ideas come from in society
because those conditions also constrain what we can imagine
what we can think of the ideas that could
appear. Yeah, I mean, there's this argument by um
the philosopher Nigel Pleasant, who has written about moral
revolutions and about the abolition of slavery. And who
has argued that the reason why slavery was abolished
at the moment, but it was abolished after centuries
in which slavery was just accepted was that at
that point, a super realistic superior alternative became available.
So that is indeed a Marxist thought that unless
you have such a superior real alternative, the criticism
that always existed just had no authority. It wasn't
heard because this practice, the practice of slavery was
seen as something indispensable, something natural. Yeah, bad, perhaps
bad, perhaps not really desirable. But yeah, we just
need it. We cannot, couldn't our economy couldn't work
without slaves. And once there was like wage labor
is an alternative criticism gained authority. And then the
abolitionist movement was at to to happen and to
to to the practice was able to be abolished.
So that's of course, there are many different. Slavery
is a very complex topic. There's a lot of
literature about it, but I like that. So I
find that thought convincing. And so that's also one
of the reasons why I think it's important to
look at the role of technology as a part
of the of the conditions that enable criticism to
become really forceful and to make changes possible. So
I always careful of not giving too much weight
to the role of individual agents in these processes,
but also to, to look at the these conditions
and these developments that enable the particular agents and
also to make that criticism hurt and so change.
So in many ways, our morality and ethics follow
from the material conditions we live in, right? I
mean, it's ideas or even moral ideas specifically are
not just about people thinking about things or rationalizing
things a lot and coming up with new ideas
and then changing societies, sometimes it's material conditions change.
And then because of that people have new ideas
and then I morals change
exactly though this idea of techno change assumes that
it goes both ways. But usually people often just
think about the way that morality or ethical thinking
can in a way influence technological development. Um So
the whole techno moral change literature focuses on what
they call technology induced moral change. But taking for
granted, there's also the other influence, right? It's not,
it's not like purely deterministic or saying that these
conditions determine the development of ethics. But the idea
is more that this has to be taken seriously
that there is this influence. But at the same
time, there is also it goes also the other
way. So also our ethical arguments, ideas, experiences have
an influence on those conditions. So it it it's
it's mutual, mutual, very complex I think interaction. Mhm
So I have one last question here. Then still
on the topic of techno moral revolutions or changes
in your work, I read about this term techno,
moral resilience. And also let me read the quote
here since we do not know what elements of
morality will change and how they will change. Moral
education should aim at fo uh fostering what has
been called moral resilience. So could you explain this
idea? What does moral or techno, moral resilience mean?
Yeah. So the idea is that techno or change
or disruption that brings about a lot of uncertainty,
confusion, loss of orientation, that this requires a certain
complex capacity, which my co-author Katarina Ba and I
then termed techno more resilience, we already find in
X Spar's work on techno model change the concept
of moral resilience. But then he doesn't develop that.
But I think he even says techno model at
some point, but he doesn't really develop that further.
So um the idea is that moral education should
prepare us or should prepare people to cope with
those instances of technological change and disruption. And that
this has basically, yeah, two important elements. One is
um the ability to cope with moral disturbances. And
so in a way also to be open to
changes, to be able to adapt, but at the
same time, not to lose one's identity as a
moral agent. So still also maintain like a sort
of a stable identity. Um We argued that this
is something that so we can conceive of this
techno resilience as at the individual level, but also
at the systemic or like practice level. And we
ar with that in order to foster this capacity
that we contact a more resilience, moral education should
focus on a triangle of capacities, namely moral imagination.
Very importantly, the capacity for critical reflection and the
capacity for maintaining one small agency in the face
of disturbances. And I think imagination is really important
though what you need to cope with this phenomenon
of technical change of disruption is to be able
to I think react creatively to those changes. So
to be able to imagine possible scenarios, developments to
um not let yourself completely like despair because of
all the uncertainty but creatively react and that might
also contribute to shaping this techno moral future. So
I I am admittedly itself on a bit vague.
Um But yeah, in fact, in fact, it also
was mentioned in the quote that you read out
morality has this dynamic character and we do not
know we know that it can change and it
will change, but we don't know how and we
know by now or at least I believe and
others believe that those changes are intertwined with technological
changes. And we know that technology is being developed
like faster, more rapidly, think of artificial intelligence and
all its applications now how much it disrupted our
world already. So it seems that um somehow we
need to try to, to prepare people for that
and also to, to be aware of the fact
that their current, as we talked about that also
earlier in the context of technology, our current moral
and conceptual frameworks, they are not fixed. So it's
in the future, it's not that we have these
fixed frameworks. And with, with those, we will assess
and evaluate future technologies, but those frameworks are changing
themselves. And so sort of develop capacities to, to
nevertheless be able to take a moral stance to
be open also to those changes in those frameworks.
So to keep also reflecting critically upon our moral
concepts and the the standards and concept that we
use to evaluate technological developments and new technologies that
are being developed and implemented in our societies.
Yeah, I if I may uh and if you
disagree with, with what I'm about to say, please
uh tell me so. But uh I think that
perhaps uh an example, a good example of um
perhaps uh educationally and also just even outside of
the education system, how uh people could become more
techno moral resilient. I mean, a specific example of
that is earlier, we talked about how concepts like
father and mother could be disrupted by Actos technologies.
And I mean, I myself personally have sort of
been liberated from this uh from these kinds of
concepts by learning more about anthropology because I know
that there are other human societies out there that
do not care much about the nuclear family of
cooper breathing. And I mean, if things change if
uh somewhere in the future, we no longer care
about using concepts like that, like father, mother, whatever,
uh it will not necessarily spell the end of
western civilization.
Let's see. Yes. No, you're right. And in a
way, this is also a way of experiencing conceptual
disruption when you are learning about very different human
societies where yeah, certain concepts do not play an
important role or have a different meaning that also
has this disruptive effect. So in, in my research
program, we mainly study the disruptive effect that technologies
have on, on some of our fundamental concepts. But
we um we acknowledge that there's also this phenomenon
of disruption that comes from the Yeah, I'm learning
about those very different societies and cultures.
Yeah. But, but I guess that unfortunately, it's not
something that humans and in this case, it's humans
in general like to do that is teach their
Children that wherever is prevalent in their society is
not necessary with the correct way of doing things
because everywhere people always teach their Children that however
society works is the way it should work unfortunately.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. But of course, I would say
that moral education, which of course is also not
distinct from education in general and it's of course
sort of integrate into that. But what we would
want to call moral education should always aim at
the development of this critical capacity because on the
one hand, when you are in moral upbringing, you
adopt a moral outlook, you are socialized like into
a certain moral community. And you have to also
to be able to develop a moral outlook. I
think in the first place, you need to accept
some norms, you cannot question everything, then you are
unable to make any moral judgments. So you need
to also of course, come to believe many moral
judgments and adopt uh values and norms. But then
at the same time, you also need to, to
become like a competent moral agent, you need to
develop this capacity to critically reflect upon elements, different
elements of that outlook. And then of course, usually
that is prompted through certain experiences where you suddenly
see that a certain norm of value or judgment
is problematic and something that happens when you like
um come into contact with humans that are sites
that have different norms or if you just yeah,
experience cases where there is perhaps in incoherent inconsistency
between some other things that that society believes is
important and good. And that conflicts perhaps with a
certain norm that is perhaps very old but still
like has an important role because it's it's suggested
generally speaking, being very important. So all these experiences
and I think that is definitely part of moral
education, this development of this critical capacity. While at
the same time, of course, adopting taking on the
standards and and norms of one particular society
also. Because I I think it is important for
people to develop that sort of moral capacity because
it's just inevitable that even during your own lifetime
norms will change in your own society. So I
guess that would even make you more, uh, even,
not just morally, but also psychologically more resilient when
faced with those changes. Because as we see many
times older people, whenever societal norms change, they think
it's already the, the end of the world and
they get very confused and stuff like
that.
Right.
Yeah. And I guess that um like with the
younger generations in their lifetime, the changes are much
more drastic than they were like when I think
of my grandmother who indeed also at some point
had problems like following them things. But I think
in her lifetime, the changes were much less like
quick and, and, and radically fargo than what we
experience and the the younger generations done even more.
Yeah. So that also means technical resilience becomes more
and more important because of the acceleration technological development
and the way it, yeah, really radically changes all
like domains of, of our life,
right. So Doctor Eman, uh just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
find your work on the internet?
Yeah. So um one important source is the book
Ethics of Socially Disruptive Technologies and introduction that has
been published by open book publishers and whether it's
chapter five on this particular technology, technology, I also
actually just today posted a blog post of the
blog and block justice everywhere on this topic. And
there are also two previous posts about this technology
that people could read and then there will hopefully
soon be also more articles on different aspects of
the technology.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description of the interview. And look, I I really
love our talks. I love the first one. And
that's the reason why I wanted to have you
on the show again to talk just about sative
technologies and techno moral revolution. So uh thank you
so much for your work and thank you for
coming on the show again.
Thank you very much. Lean. I enjoyed it as
well. Thanks a lot.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
and La Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel Sran, David Sloan Wilson
Yasa, Dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nicole Barba ad Hunt, Pavlo Stass Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di
Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Eon
Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn,
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man
George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Abert Liam. Dan Biar. Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J
Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank
Luca Stuffin, Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes Dixon,
Bendik Muller, Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knit
and Rosie. Thank you for all.